Building a Concurrent Message Queue
Condition variables
The polling loop we have used in the previous example has not been programmed optimally: As long as the program is running, the while-loop will keep the processor busy, constantly asking wether new data is available. In the following, we will look at a better way to solve this problem without putting too much load on the processor.

The alternative to a polling loop is for the main thread to block and wait for a signal that new data is available. This would prevent the infinite loop from keeping the processor busy. We have already discussed a mechanism that would fulfill this purpose - the promise-future construct. The problem with futures is that they can only be used a single time. Once a future is ready and get() has been called, it can not be used any more. For our purpose, we need a signaling mechanism that can be re-used. The C++ standard offers such a construct in the form of "condition variables".

A std::condition_variable has a method wait(), which blocks, when it is called by a thread. The condition variable is kept blocked until it is released by another thread. The release works via the method notify_one() or the notify_all method. The key difference between the two methods is that notify_one will only wake up a single waiting thread while notify_all will wake up all the waiting threads at once.

A condition variable is a low-level building block for more advanced communication protocols. It neither has a memory of its own nor does it remember notifications. Imagine that one thread calls wait() before another thread calls notify(), the condition variable works as expected and the first thread will wake up. Imagine the case however where the call order is reversed such that notify() is called before wait(), the notification will be lost and the thread will block indefinitely. So in more sophisticated communication protocols a condition variable should always be used in conjunction with another shared state that can be checked independently. Notifying a condition variable in this case would then only mean to proceed and check this other shared state.

Let us pretend our shared variable was a boolean called dataIsAvailable. Now let’s discuss two scenarios for the protocol depending on who acts first, the producer or the consumer thread.

Scenario 1:
Image

The consumer thread checks dataIsAvailable() and since it is false, the consumer thread blocks and waits on the condition variable. Later in time, the producer thread sets dataIsAvailable to true and calls notify_one on the condition variable. At this point, the consumer wakes up and proceeds with its work.

Scenario 2:
Image

Here, the producer thread comes first, sets dataIsAvailable() to true and calls notify_one. Then, the consumer thread comes and checks dataIsAvailable() and finds it to be true - so it does not call wait and proceeds directly with its work. Even though the notification is lost, it does not cause a problem in this construct - the message has been passed successfully through dataIsAvailable and the wait-lock has been avoided.

In an ideal (non-concurrent) world, these two scenarios would most probably be sufficient to describe to possible combinations. But in concurrent programming, things are not so easy. As seen in the diagrams, there are four atomic operations, two for each thread. So when executed often enough, all possible interleavings will show themselves - and we have to find the ones that still cause a problem.

Here is one combination that will cause the program to lock:

Image

The consumer thread reads dataIsAvailable(), which is false in the example. Then, the producer sets dataIsAvailable() to true and calls notify. Due to this unlucky interleaving of actions, the consumer thread calls wait because it has seen dataIsAvailable() as false. This is possible because the consumer thread tasks are not a joint atomic operation but may be separated by the scheduler and interleaved with some other tasks - in this case the two actions performed by the producer thread. The problem here is that after calling wait, the consumer thread will never wake up again. Also, as you may have noticed, the shared variable dataReady is not protected by a mutex here - which makes it even more likely that something will go wrong.

One quick idea for a solution which might come to mind would be to perform the two operations dataIsAvailable and wait under a locked mutex. While this would effectively prevent the interleaving of tasks between different threads, it would also prevent another thread from ever modifying dataIsAvailable again.

One reason for discussing these failed scenarios in such depth is to make you aware of the complexity of concurrent behavior - even with a simple protocol like the one we are discussing right now.

So let us now look at the final solution to the above problems and thus a working version of our communication protocol.

Image

As seen above, we are closing the gap between reading the state and entering the wait. We are reading the state under the lock (red bar) and we call wait still under the lock. Then, we let wait release the lock and enter the wait state in one atomic step. This is only possible because the wait() method is able to take a lock as an argument. The lock that we can pass to wait however is not the lock_guard we have been using so often until now but instead it has to be a lock that can be temporarily unlocked inside wait - a suitable lock for this purpose would be the unique_lock type which we have discussed in the previous section.